Kubernetes has been super useful for me, it allows me to have infrastructure as yml files. given the cluster is set up. I have only ever used k3s to set up a cluster, and I have mixed feelings. Here they are

TL;DR: If you dont know how to deploy kubernetes from scratch, should you be using kubernetes at all?


## ✅ Single node is simple
To set up a single node cluster, you simply need to run one command like it says on their website
`curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | sh -`
and it works pretty well. The only thing is it does use a lot of memory like .75G, not sure if this is useful or just garbage that has not been cleaned up (lets re-write it in Rust instead of Go anyone?). For example a single node k3s cluster should ideally not use any more memory than installing docker on the system, but it is. Its ok, memory is not expensive at all now adays anyway.

## ✅ Multinode is simple and secure
Spinning up a multinode cluster is simple, just run `--cluster-init` for the first node and create a joinable secret so that no other nodes can join without knowing the secret.
```
curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_TOKEN=SECRET sh -s - server --cluster-init
```

Then for the next nodes, pass in the secret and the API server address of the first node
```
curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_TOKEN=SECRET sh -s - server \
    --server https://<ip or hostname of server1>:6443
```

## 😕 Issue 1: secrets encryption
For some reason by default k3s does not encrypt kubernetes secrets resources, they are just put in the database unencrypted. This is not the worst depending on your threat model but why not just have them encrypted anyway. Linkilly it is just one cluster initialization parameter

```
curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_TOKEN=$secret sh -s - server --cluster-init --secrets-encryption 
```

## 😕 Issue 2: Default LB
One of the most widely used load balancers used in the kubernetes ecosystem is Metal LB. This is a failover load balancer where instead of connecting incoming requests round robin to various backends, it uses layer 2 IP address advertizements to decide the backend that is serving the request at a time, if that fails, another backend picks up the l2 advertizements. In my use case this is exactly what I am looking for since I dont want to manage IP addresses outside of kubernetes

One of the drawbacks to this method of load balancing is if a backend is overloaded either serving a request or receiving/sending the max amount of network traffic that link can handle, it will start failing over, already possibly degrading the service. This is less likely to happen with round robin based load balancing. This should not be a problem with most k3s use cases since it is geared towards small deployments and they would not be handling a lot of traffic

By default k3s ships with a load balancer called [ServiceLB](https://github.com/k3s-io/klipper-lb). It does not seem that useful, it is like a ClusterIP served through a NodePort. I want to deal specifically with IP addresses, so I needed to install Metal LB and disable ServiceLB when spinning up the service

Installing k3s so far:
```
$ curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_TOKEN=$secret sh -s - server --cluster-init --secrets-encryption --disable=servicelb
$ <install metal LB CRDs>
```

## 😕 Issue 3: Bundled Traefik
Traefik is yet another HTTP/S reverse proxy implementation modeled as an "ingress" implementation. I have no issues with it so far, but I do have an issue with the fact that it is bundled with k3s. My use case specifically, I want to serve both public services and private services through the same cluster (this means both public and private IP addresses assigned to the cluster). 

You cannot securely use the same reverse proxy for this since there is no way to differentiate that even though a request came from the public internet through the public IP address, it still hits the same load balancer as the internal services, which means with a well crafted HTTP request, it can hit private services not intending to be exposed to the public internet (see spoofing the host header)

It may be possible to seperate this traffic, but it would be a lot of effort and probably error prone and a maintenence nightmare too, so an easier way is to use two seperate instances of Traefik, each exposed on their own Metal LB IP address (one public, one private) therefore the same ingress is not serving both public and private requests. Since I need to run 2 instances of Traefik, and there is not one single parameter in k3s to say deploy 2, let me just deploy both manually with CRDs

Installing k3s so far:
```
$ curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_TOKEN=$secret sh -s - server --cluster-init --secrets-encryption --disable=servicelb --disable=traefik 
$ <install metal LB CRDs>
$ <install Traefik CRDs for the first instance>
$ <install Traefik CRDs for the second instance>
```

## 😕 Issue 4: Unencrypted CNI by default
So this is not the worst but the inter-node communication is done by default using the VXLAN protocol, which is pretty much L2 packets tunneled over UDP to the node it needs to go to, then the kernel sends it on its marry L2 way. The issue is that this is not encrypted so a network evesdropper can see all the traffic. You would be wrong to say that since we are using HTTPS in the cluster all of this is encrypted anyway because the ingress controller actually unencrypts the packets before sending them to the correct node to be served.

If your threat model is that if an attacker can evesdrop on the network the k3s cluster is sending stuff between anyway, it is already game over, you are fine, but why not just encrypt it anyway. It may take 2% network bandwidth overhead or whatever to do this, which is not alot, and the Wireguard protocol is optimized in the linux kernel anyway, so there should not be much latency or CPU overhead either.

```
$ curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_TOKEN=$secret sh -s - server --cluster-init --secrets-encryption --disable=servicelb --disable=traefik  --flannel-backend=wireguard-native
$ <install metal LB CRDs>
$ <install Traefik CRDs for the first instance>
$ <install Traefik CRDs for the second instance>
```

## 😭 Issue 5: Flannel does not work after a while
I was testing a case of my 3 node cluster loosing one node, and still being able to function, since a majority still exists. ETCD was able to switch leaders just fine, but when I brought the node back up, something weird happened. A few of the pods that the cluster was serving on that node did not come back up but had the status of either error or unknown!

Describing the pods showed an error message
```
"Error syncing pod, skipping" err="failed to \"CreatePodSandbox\" for \"longhorn-manager-2d6cw_longhorn-system(fe3d388b-4766-4585-9cf2-ab677ca2f6e9)\" with CreatePodSandboxError: \"Failed to create sandbox for pod \\\"longhorn-manager-2d6cw_longhorn-system(fe3d388b-4766-4585-9cf2-ab677ca2f6e9)\\\": rpc error: code = Unknown desc = failed to setup network for sandbox \\\"91e16400f64262f5ab20bb4c83c8adb72a85ddc45ddebb483a02a26012869d4c\\\": plugin type=\\\"flannel\\\" failed (add): failed to load flannel 'subnet.env' file: open /run/flannel/subnet.env: no such file or directory. Check the flannel pod log for this node.\"" pod="longhorn-system/longhorn-manager-2d6cw" podUID="fe3d388b-4766-4585-9cf2-ab677ca2f6e9"
```

This is a scary message, why was flannel not coming up? I checked and there is no file called `/run/flannel/subnet.env` on the node, even though there should be. I checked the other two nodes and yes they have this file. So that means I cannot restart the node at all or else that node will never be usable again? I really dont want to have to delete the node and add another one every time something happens! (maybe I should do this anyway as immutable deployments, but I digressed)

What if I just dont use flannel at all, and install the well-loved Calico instead? Lickilly there is prescident for this, you just install k3s without a CNI, and bolt one on later

```
$ curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_TOKEN=$secret sh -s - server --cluster-init --secrets-encryption --disable=servicelb --disable=traefik  --flannel-backend=none
$ <install metal LB CRDs>
$ <install Traefik CRDs for the first instance>
$ <install Traefik CRDs for the second instance>
$ <install Calico CRD>
```

## Conclusion 🤔
k3s markets itself as a simple way to deploy kubernetes, but this is only true if you have a simple use case, it pretty much pushes you towards deploying all the components of your cluster from scratch with every edge case not well thought out. To give credit where credit is due, they do give you quite a few options to choose what components of a cluster to deploy with wether it be choosing which CNI protocol to use (wireguard/VXLAN via Flannel) or choosing which cluster database to use (ETCD/Postgres/sqlite via KINE)

Not catching every edge case is not bad though, because frequently I wonder if you do not know how to deploy your own kubernetes cluster from scratch anyway, should you be given the privelage to use kubernetes at all? If one thing starts to not work, you will have to learn how to anyway

